# Immigration

This project was carried out in collaboration with Peace Rising, a non-profit organization seeking to provide quantitative insights connecting climate change and migrations. I wrote up a blog post describing the project: https://medium.com/@jabran.zahid/climate-change-induced-immigration-in-central-america-21d00fdd5f45. Please check it out and shoot me an email if you have any questions.

Here I briefly describe the contents of the repository and some brief comments of my modeling choices. The repo has a data folder which includes all the data used in the project. This data was preprocessed and extracted using QGIS from raster and vector data. Details of the extraction procedure are provided in the blog post linked above. The preprocessing and extraction of these data was a significant effort. I have made the data available for posterity as they provide any excellent starting point for alternative models or for further developing the model I built. 

In the programs folder I provide two main level routines: immigration_data.py and get_best_xgb_model.py. The first program generates the feature and label data which are inputs to the model. The code is partially commented and not production level. However, the default setup is fully functioning. The second code outputs the hyper parameter tuned XGBoost classification model. Additionally, there are two Jupyter Notebook files. xgboost_optimize.ipynb shows the steps for hyper parameter tuning and validation of the model. This may be used to optimize and train new models in the future. The second notebook plots.ipynb generates the plots in the blog post. It also serves as an example for how to manipulate the data and model. 

I developed several preliminary models prior to the final XGBoost model. I initially set the problem up as a regression, i.e. I was attempting to predict the year-to-year relative change in the population. While the various models I tried (linear regression, random forest, XGBoost regressor) were predictive to varying degrees, the validation score was marginal. Thus, I decided to try a simpler model which simnply classified whether the population increased or decreased. 

I tried several different models, each with increasing complexity finally settling on XGBoost. My motivation for this was that given the nature of the problem, the model needed to have sufficient complexity to capture non-linear relationships. Furthermore, I focused on Guatemala, El Salvador and Honduras but the data set is global. Thus, the model may be used with significantly larger globabl data set. Given this potential use, I wanted an algorithm that was flexible and efficient. XGBoost is "highly efficient, flexible and portable" and can be parallelized such that the same code can run on major distributed environment. Furthermore, XGBoost may be incrementally trained which may be useful given the nature of the problem.
